1 OVERVIEW
==========

**1.0 Chaos, Fractals, and Dynamics**

There is a tremendous fascination today with chaos and fractals. James Gleick’s book Chaos (Gleick 1987) was a bestseller 
for months—an amazing accomplishment for a book about mathematics and science. Picture books like The Beauty of Fractals by 
Peitgen and Richter (1986) can be found on coffee tables in living rooms everywhere. It seems that even nonmathematical 
people are captivated by the infinite patterns found in fractals (Figure 1.0.1). Perhaps most important of all, chaos and 
fractals represent hands-on mathematics that is alive and changing. You can turn on a home computer and create stunning 
mathematical images that no one has ever seen before.

Hoy en día existe una tremenda fascinación por el caos y los fractales. El libro de James Gleick, Caos (Gleick, 1987), fue un éxito de ventas durante meses, un logro asombroso para un libro sobre matemáticas y ciencia. Libros ilustrados como La belleza de los fractales, de Peitgen y Richter (1986), se pueden encontrar en las mesas de centro de las salas de estar de todo el mundo. Parece que incluso las personas sin conocimientos matemáticos se sienten cautivadas por los patrones infinitos que se encuentran en los fractales (Figura 1.0.1). Quizás lo más importante de todo es que el caos y los fractales representan una matemática práctica, viva y en constante evolución. Se puede encender un ordenador doméstico y crear imágenes matemáticas asombrosas que nadie ha visto antes.


The aesthetic appeal of chaos and fractals may explain why so many people have become intrigued by these ideas. But maybe 
you feel the urge to go deeperto learn the mathematics behind the pictures, and to see how the ideas can be applied to 
problems in science and engineering. If so, this is a textbook for you. The style of the book is informal (as you can see), 
with an emphasis on concrete examples and geometric thinking, rather than proofs and abstract arguments. It is also an 
extremely “applied” book—virtually every idea is illustrated by some application to science or engineering. In many cases, 
the applications are drawn from the recent research literature. Of course, one problem with such an applied approach is that 
not everyone is an expert in physics and biology and fluid mechanics . . . so the science as well as the mathematics will 
need to be explained from scratch. But that should 
be fun, and it can be instructive to see the connections among different fields.

El atractivo estético del caos y los fractales puede explicar por qué tantas personas se han sentido atraídas por estas ideas. Pero tal vez sientas la necesidad de profundizar para aprender las matemáticas que subyacen a las imágenes y ver cómo se pueden aplicar estas ideas a problemas de ciencia e ingeniería. Si es así, este es el libro de texto ideal para ti. El estilo del libro es informal (como puedes ver), con énfasis en ejemplos concretos y pensamiento geométrico, en lugar de demostraciones y argumentos abstractos. También es un libro sumamente aplicado: prácticamente cada idea se ilustra con alguna aplicación a la ciencia o la ingeniería. En muchos casos, las aplicaciones provienen de la literatura de investigación reciente. Por supuesto, un problema con este enfoque aplicado es que no todos son expertos en física, biología y mecánica de fluidos... por lo que tanto la ciencia como las matemáticas deberán explicarse desde cero. Pero eso debería ser divertido, y puede ser instructivo ver las conexiones entre diferentes campos.


Before we start, we should agree about something: chaos and fractals are part of an even grander subject known as dynamics. 
This is the subject that deals with change, with systems that evolve in time. Whether the system in question settles down to 
equilibrium, keeps repeating in cycles, or does something more complicated, it is dynamics that we use to analyze the 
behavior. You have probably been exposed to dynamical ideas in various places—in courses in differential equations, 
classical mechanics, chemical kinetics, population biology, and so on. Viewed from the perspective of dynamics, all of these 
subjects can be placed in a common framework, as we discuss at the end of this chapter.

Antes de comenzar, debemos ponernos de acuerdo en algo: el caos y los fractales forman parte de un campo aún más amplio conocido como dinámica. Este campo se ocupa del cambio, de los sistemas que evolucionan con el tiempo. Ya sea que el sistema en cuestión alcance el equilibrio, se repita en ciclos o realice algún proceso más complejo, la dinámica es la herramienta que utilizamos para analizar su comportamiento. Probablemente ya hayas tenido contacto con conceptos de dinámica en diversos contextos: en cursos de ecuaciones diferenciales, mecánica clásica, cinética química, biología de poblaciones, etc. Desde la perspectiva de la dinámica, todos estos temas pueden integrarse en un marco común, como veremos al final de este capítulo.


Our study of dynamics begins in earnest in Chapter 2. But before digging in, we present two overviews of the subject, one 
historical and one logical. Our treatment is intuitive; careful definitions will come later. This chapter concludes with a 
“dynamical view of the world,” a framework that will guide our studies for the rest of the book.

Nuestro estudio de la dinámica comienza formalmente en el Capítulo 2. Pero antes de profundizar, presentamos dos panoramas generales del tema: uno histórico y otro lógico. Nuestro enfoque es intuitivo; las definiciones precisas se presentarán más adelante. Este capítulo concluye con una «visión dinámica del mundo», un marco que guiará nuestros estudios durante el resto del libro.


**1.1 Capsule History of Dynamics**

Although dynamics is an interdisciplinary subject today, it was originally a branch of physics. The subject began in the 
mid-1600s, when Newton invented differential equations, discovered his laws of motion and universal gravitation, and 
combined them to explain Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. Specifically, Newton solved the two-body problem—the problem of 
calculating the motion of the earth around the sun, given the inverse-square law of gravitational attraction between them. 
Subsequent generations of mathematicians and physicists tried to extend Newton’s analytical methods to the three-body 
problem (e.g., sun, earth, and moon) but curiously this problem turned out to be much more difficult to solve. After decades 
of effort, it was eventually realized that the three-body problem was essentially impossible to solve, in the sense of 
obtaining explicit formulas for the motions of the three bodies. At this point the situation seemed hopeless.

Aunque la dinámica es hoy una disciplina interdisciplinaria, originalmente era una rama de la física. Su origen se remonta a mediados del siglo XVII, cuando Newton inventó las ecuaciones diferenciales, descubrió sus leyes del movimiento y de la gravitación universal, y las combinó para explicar las leyes de Kepler sobre el movimiento planetario. En concreto, Newton resolvió el problema de los dos cuerpos: el problema de calcular el movimiento de la Tierra alrededor del Sol, dada la ley de atracción gravitatoria inversamente proporcional al cuadrado de la distancia entre ellos. Las generaciones posteriores de matemáticos y físicos intentaron extender los métodos analíticos de Newton al problema de los tres cuerpos (por ejemplo, el Sol, la Tierra y la Luna), pero, curiosamente, este problema resultó ser mucho más difícil de resolver. Tras décadas de esfuerzo, finalmente se comprendió que el problema de los tres cuerpos era esencialmente imposible de resolver, en el sentido de obtener fórmulas explícitas para los movimientos de los tres cuerpos. En ese momento, la situación parecía desesperada.


The breakthrough came with the work of Poincaré in the late 1800s. He introduced a new point of view that emphasized 
qualitative rather than quantitative questions. For example, instead of asking for the exact positions of the planets at all 
times, he asked “Is the solar system stable forever, or will some planets eventually fly off to infinity?” Poincaré 
developed a powerful geometric approach to analyzing such questions. That approach has flowered into the modern subject of 
dynamics, with applications reaching far beyond celestial mechanics. Poincaré was also the first person to glimpse the 
possibility of chaos, in which a deterministic system exhibits aperiodic behavior that depends sensitively on the initial 
conditions, thereby rendering long-term prediction impossible.

El gran avance se produjo con el trabajo de Poincaré a finales del siglo XIX. Introdujo un nuevo punto de vista que hacía hincapié en las cuestiones cualitativas en lugar de las cuantitativas. Por ejemplo, en lugar de preguntar por las posiciones exactas de los planetas en todo momento, se preguntó: "¿Es el sistema solar estable para siempre, o algunos planetas acabarán desapareciendo hacia el infinito?". Poincaré desarrolló un potente enfoque geométrico para analizar estas cuestiones. Este enfoque ha florecido hasta convertirse en la disciplina moderna de la dinámica, con aplicaciones que van mucho más allá de la mecánica celeste. Poincaré también fue el primero en vislumbrar la posibilidad del caos, en el que un sistema determinista exhibe un comportamiento aperiódico que depende sensiblemente de las condiciones iniciales, lo que imposibilita la predicción a largo plazo.


But chaos remained in the background in the first half of the twentieth century; instead dynamics was largely concerned with 
nonlinear oscillators and their applications in physics and engineering. Nonlinear oscillators played a vital role in the 
development of such technologies as radio, radar, phase-locked loops, and lasers. On the theoretical side, nonlinear 
oscillators also stimulated the invention of new mathematical techniques—pioneers in this area include van der Pol, 
Andronov, Littlewood, Cartwright, Levinson, and Smale. Meanwhile, in a separate development, Poincaré’s geometric methods 
were being extended to yield a much deeper understanding of classical mechanics, thanks to the work of Birkhoff and later 
Kolmogorov, Arnol’d, and Moser.

Pero el caos permaneció en un segundo plano durante la primera mitad del siglo XX; en cambio, la dinámica se centró principalmente en los osciladores no lineales y sus aplicaciones en física e ingeniería. Los osciladores no lineales desempeñaron un papel fundamental en el desarrollo de tecnologías como la radio, el radar, los bucles de enganche de fase y los láseres. En el ámbito teórico, los osciladores no lineales también impulsaron la invención de nuevas técnicas matemáticas; entre los pioneros de este campo se encuentran van der Pol, Andronov, Littlewood, Cartwright, Levinson y Smale. Mientras tanto, en un desarrollo paralelo, los métodos geométricos de Poincaré se extendieron para lograr una comprensión mucho más profunda de la mecánica clásica, gracias al trabajo de Birkhoff y, posteriormente, de Kolmogorov, Arnol'd y Moser.


The invention of the high-speed computer in the 1950s was a watershed in the history of dynamics. The computer allowed one 
to experiment with equations in a way that was impossible before, and thereby to develop some intuition about nonlinear 
systems. Such experiments led to Lorenz’s discovery in 1963 of chaotic motion on a strange attractor. He studied a 
simplified model of convection rolls in the atmosphere to gain insight into the notorious unpredictability of the weather. 

La invención de la computadora de alta velocidad en la década de 1950 marcó un hito en la historia de la dinámica. La computadora permitió experimentar con ecuaciones de una manera antes imposible, desarrollando así una intuición sobre los sistemas no lineales. Estos experimentos llevaron al descubrimiento de Lorenz en 1963 del movimiento caótico en un atractor extraño. Estudió un modelo simplificado de vórtices de convección en la atmósfera para comprender mejor la notoria imprevisibilidad del clima.

Lorenz found that the solutions to his equations never settled down to equilibrium or to a periodic state—instead they 
continued to oscillate in an irregular, aperiodic fashion. Moreover, if he started his simulations from two slightly 
different initial conditions, the resulting behaviors would soon become totally different. The implication was that the 
system was inherently unpredictable—tiny errors in measuring the current state of the atmosphere (or any other chaotic 
system) would be amplified rapidly, eventually leading to embarrassing forecasts. But Lorenz also showed that there was 
structure in the chaos—when plotted in three dimensions, the solutions to his equations fell onto a butterfly-shaped set of 
points (Figure 1.1.1). He argued that this set had to be “an infinite complex of surfaces”today we would regard it as an 
example of a fractal.

Lorenz descubrió que las soluciones a sus ecuaciones nunca alcanzaban el equilibrio ni un estado periódico; en cambio, seguían oscilando de forma irregular y aperiódica. Además, si iniciaba sus simulaciones desde dos condiciones iniciales ligeramente diferentes, los comportamientos resultantes pronto se volvían totalmente distintos. Esto implicaba que el sistema era inherentemente impredecible: pequeños errores al medir el estado actual de la atmósfera (o de cualquier otro sistema caótico) se amplificarían rápidamente, lo que eventualmente daría lugar a pronósticos erróneos. Pero Lorenz también demostró que existía una estructura en el caos: al representarlas en tres dimensiones, las soluciones a sus ecuaciones se concentraban en un conjunto de puntos con forma de mariposa (Figura 1.1.1). Sostuvo que este conjunto debía ser «un complejo infinito de superficies»; hoy lo consideraríamos un ejemplo de fractal.

Lorenz’s work had little impact until the 1970s, the boom years for chaos. Here are some of the main developments of that 
glorious decade. In 1971, Ruelle and Takens proposed a new theory for the onset of turbulence in fluids, based on abstract 
considerations about strange attractors. A few years later, May found examples of chaos in iterated mappings arising in 
population biology, and wrote an influential review article that stressed the pedagogical importance of studying simple 
nonlinear systems, to counterbalance the often misleading linear intuition fostered by traditional education. Next came the 
most surprising discovery of all, due to the physicist Feigenbaum. He discovered that there are certain universal laws 
governing the transition from regular to chaotic behavior; roughly speaking, completely different systems can go chaotic in 
the same way. His work established a link between chaos and phase transitions, and enticed a generation of physicists to the 
study of dynamics. Finally, experimentalists such as Gollub, Libchaber, Swinney, Linsay, Moon, and Westervelt tested the new 
ideas about chaos in experiments on fluids, chemical reactions, electronic circuits, mechanical oscillators, and 
semiconductors.

El trabajo de Lorenz tuvo poca repercusión hasta la década de 1970, el auge del caos. He aquí algunos de los principales avances de esa década gloriosa. En 1971, Ruelle y Takens propusieron una nueva teoría sobre el inicio de la turbulencia en fluidos, basada en consideraciones abstractas sobre atractores extraños. Unos años más tarde, May encontró ejemplos de caos en mapeos iterados que surgían en biología de poblaciones y escribió un influyente artículo de revisión que destacaba la importancia pedagógica del estudio de sistemas no lineales simples, para contrarrestar la intuición lineal, a menudo engañosa, fomentada por la educación tradicional. A continuación, se produjo el descubrimiento más sorprendente de todos, gracias al físico Feigenbaum. Descubrió que existen ciertas leyes universales que rigen la transición del comportamiento regular al caótico; en términos generales, sistemas completamente diferentes pueden volverse caóticos de la misma manera. Su trabajo estableció un vínculo entre el caos y las transiciones de fase, e impulsó a una generación de físicos al estudio de la dinámica. Finalmente, experimentadores como Gollub, Libchaber, Swinney, Linsay, Moon y Westervelt pusieron a prueba las nuevas ideas sobre el caos en experimentos con fluidos, reacciones químicas, circuitos electrónicos, osciladores mecánicos y semiconductores.


Although chaos stole the spotlight, there were two other major developments in dynamics in the 1970s. Mandelbrot codified 
and popularized fractals, produced magnificent computer graphics of them, and showed how they could be applied in a variety 
of subjects. And in the emerging area of mathematical biology, Winfree applied the geometric methods of dynamics to 
biological oscillations, especially circadian (roughly 24-hour) rhythms and heart rhythms.

Aunque el caos acaparó toda la atención, en la década de 1970 se produjeron otros dos avances importantes en el campo de la dinámica. Mandelbrot codificó y popularizó los fractales, creó magníficas representaciones gráficas por ordenador de los mismos y demostró su aplicación en diversos ámbitos. Por su parte, en el incipiente campo de la biología matemática, Winfree aplicó los métodos geométricos de la dinámica a las oscilaciones biológicas, especialmente a los ritmos circadianos (de aproximadamente 24 horas) y a los ritmos cardíacos.


By the 1980s many people were working on dynamics, with contributions too numerous to list. Table 1.1.1 summarizes this 
history.

En la década de 1980, muchas personas trabajaban en dinámica, con contribuciones demasiado numerosas para enumerarlas. La tabla 1.1.1 resume esta historia.


**1.2 The Importance of Being Nonlinear**

Now we turn from history to the logical structure of dynamics. First we need to introduce some terminology and make some 
distinctions.

There are two main types of dynamical systems: differential equations and iterated maps (also known as difference 
equations). Differential equations describe the evolution of systems in continuous time, whereas iterated maps arise in 
problems where time is discrete. Differential equations are used much more widely in science and engineering, and we shall 
therefore concentrate on them. Later in the book we will see that iterated maps can also be very useful, both for providing 
simple examples of chaos, and also as tools for analyzing periodic or chaotic solutions of differential equations.

Now confining our attention to differential equations, the main distinction is between ordinary and partial differential 
equations. For instance, the equation for a damped harmonic oscillator

.. math::

   m \frac{d^2 x}{dt^2} + b \frac{dx}{dt} + kx = 0 


(1)

is an ordinary differential equation, because it involves only ordinary derivatives dx/dt and :math:`d^2 x / dt^2`. That 
is, there 
is only one independent variable, the time t. In contrast, the heat equation

.. math::

   \frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2}


is a partial differential equation—it has both time t and space x as independent variables. Our concern in this book is with 
purely temporal behavior, and so we deal with ordinary differential equations almost exclusively.

A very general framework for ordinary differential equations is provided by the system

.. math::

   \begin{matrix}
   \dot{x}_1 & = f_1(x_1, ..., x_n)  \\
    ... & ... \\
   \dot{x}_n & = f_n(x_1, ..., x_n)  \\
   \end{matrix}


(2)


Here the overdots denote differentiation with respect to t. Thus :math:`\dot{x}_1 \equiv dx_i /dt`. The variables :math:`x_1, ..., x_n` might represent 
concentrations of chemicals in a reactor, populations of different species in an ecosystem, or the positions and velocities 
of the planets in the solar system. The functions :math:`f_1, ..., f_n` are determined by the problem at hand.

For example, the damped oscillator (1) can be rewritten in the form of (2),  thanks to the following trick: we introduce new 
variables :math:`x_1 = x` and :math:`x_2 = \dot{x}`. Then :math:`\dot{x}_1 = x_2`, from the definitions, and

.. math::

   \begin{matrix}
   \dot{x}_2 & = \ddot{x} = - \frac{b}{m} \dot{x} - \frac{k}{m} x \\
    & = - \frac{b}{m} x_2 - \frac{k}{m} x_1 \\
   \end{matrix}

from the definitions and the governing equation (1). Hence the equivalent system (2) is

.. math::

   \begin{matrix}
   \dot{x}_1 & = x_2 \\
   \dot{x}_2 & = - \frac{b}{m} x_2 - \frac{k}{m} x_1 \\
   \end{matrix}


This system is said to be linear, because all the x i on the right-hand side appear to the first power only. Otherwise the 
system would be nonlinear. Typical nonlinear terms are products, powers, and functions of the :math:`x_i`, such as 
:math:`x_1 x_2,(x_1)^3`, or :math:`\cos x_2`.
 
For example, the swinging of a pendulum is governed by the equation

.. math::

   \ddot{x} + \frac{g}{L} \sin x = 0, 

where x is the angle of the pendulum from vertical, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and L is the length of the 
pendulum. The equivalent system is nonlinear:

.. math::

   \begin{matrix}
   \dot{x}_1 & = x_2  \\
   \dot{x}_2 & - \frac{g}{L} \sin x_1  \\
   \end{matrix}

Nonlinearity makes the pendulum equation very difficult to solve analytically. The usual way around this is to fudge, by 
invoking the small angle approximation :math:`\sin x \approx x` for x<< 1. This converts the problem to a linear one, 
which can then be 
solved easily. But by restricting to small x, we’re throwing out some of the physics, like motions where the pendulum whirls 
over the top. Is it really necessary to make such drastic approximations?

It turns out that the pendulum equation can be solved analytically, in terms of elliptic functions. But there ought to be an 
easier way. After all, the motion of the pendulum is simple: at low energy, it swings back and forth, and at high energy it 
whirls over the top. There should be some way of extracting this information from the system directly. This is the sort of 
problem we’ll learn how to solve, using geometric methods.

Here’s the rough idea. Suppose we happen to know a solution to the pendulum system, for a particular initial condition. This 
solution would be a pair of functions x1 (t) and x2 (t), representing the position and velocity of the pendulum. If we 
construct an abstract space with coordinates (x1 , x 2 ), then the solution ( x1 (t), x2 (t)) corresponds to a point moving 
along a curve in this space (Figure 1.2.1).

This curve is called a trajectory, and the space is called the phase space for the system. The phase space is completely 
filled with trajectories, since each point can serve as an initial condition.

Our goal is to run this construction in reverse: given the system, we want to draw the trajectories, and thereby extract 
information about the solutions. In many cases, geometric reasoning will allow us to draw the trajectories without actually 
solving the system!

Some terminology: the phase space for the general system (2) is the space with coordinates x1 , … , xn . Because this space 
is n-dimensional, we will refer to (2) as an n-dimensional system or an nth-order system. Thus n represents the dimension of 
the phase space.

Nonautonomous Systems

You might worry that (2) is not general enough because it doesn’t include any explicit time dependence. How do we deal with 
time-dependent or nonautonomous   equations like the forced harmonic oscillator mx + bx + kx = F cos t ? In this case too 
there’s an easy trick that allows us to rewrite the system in the form (2). We   let x 1  x and x 2  x as before but now we 
introduce x 3  t. Then x 3  1 and so the equivalent system is

 x 1 = x2 

1  x 2 = (−kx 1 − bx 2 + F cos x 3 ) m

(3)

 x 3 = 1

which is an example of a three-dimensional system. Similarly, an nth-order time-dependent equation is a special case of an 
(n 1)-dimensional system. By this trick, we can always remove any time dependence by adding an extra dimension to the 
system.

The virtue of this change of variables is that it allows us to visualize a phase space with trajectories frozen in it. 
Otherwise, if we allowed explicit time dependence, the vectors and the trajectories would always be wiggling—this would ruin 
the geometric picture we’re trying to build. A more physical motivation is that the state of the forced harmonic oscillator 
is truly three-dimensional: we need to know  three numbers, x, x , and t, to predict the future, given the present. So a 
three-dimensional phase space is natural.

The cost, however, is that some of our terminology is nontraditional. For example, the forced harmonic oscillator would 
traditionally be regarded as a second-order linear equation, whereas we will regard it as a third-order nonlinear system, 
since (3) is nonlinear, thanks to the cosine term. As we’ll see later in the book, forced oscillators have many of the 
properties associated with nonlinear systems, and so there are genuine conceptual advantages to our choice of language.

Why Are Nonlinear Problems So Hard?

As we’ve mentioned earlier, most nonlinear systems are impossible to solve analytically. Why are nonlinear systems so much 
harder to analyze than linear ones? The essential difference is that linear systems can be broken down into parts. Then each 
part can be solved separately and finally recombined to get the answer.

This idea allows a fantastic simplification of complex problems, and underlies such methods as normal modes, Laplace 
transforms, superposition arguments, and Fourier analysis. In this sense, a linear system is precisely equal to the sum of 
its parts.

But many things in nature don’t act this way. Whenever parts of a system interfere, or cooperate, or compete, there are 
nonlinear interactions going on. Most of everyday life is nonlinear, and the principle of superposition fails spectacularly. 
If you listen to your two favorite songs at the same time, you won’t get double the pleasure! Within the realm of physics, 
nonlinearity is vital to the operation of a laser, the formation of turbulence in a fluid, and the superconductivity of 
Josephson junctions.

1.3 A Dynamical View of the World

Now that we have established the ideas of nonlinearity and phase space, we can present a framework for dynamics and its 
applications. Our goal is to show the logical structure of the entire subject. The framework presented in Figure 1.3.1 will 
guide our studies thoughout this book.

The framework has two axes. One axis tells us the number of variables needed to characterize the state of the system. 
Equivalently, this number is the dimension of the phase space. The other axis tells us whether the system is linear or 
nonlinear.

For example, consider the exponential growth of a population of organisms.  This system is described by the first-order 
differential equation x  rx where x is the population at time t and r is the growth rate. We place this system in the column 
labeled “n  1” because one piece of information—the current value of the population x—is sufficient to predict the 
population at any later time. The system  is also classified as linear because the differential equation x  rx is linear in 
x.

As a second example, consider the swinging of a pendulum, governed by

g  x + sin x = 0. L

In contrast to the previous example, the state of this system is given by two vari ables: its current angle x and angular 
velocity x . (Think of it this way: we need  the initial values of both x and x to determine the solution uniquely. For 
example, if we knew only x, we wouldn’t know which way the pendulum was swinging.) Because two variables are needed to 
specify the state, the pendulum belongs in the n  2 column of Figure 1.3.1. Moreover, the system is nonlinear, as discussed 
in the previous section. Hence the pendulum is in the lower, nonlinear half of the n  2 column.

One can continue to classify systems in this way, and the result will be something like the framework shown here. 
Admittedly, some aspects of the picture are

debatable. You might think that some topics should be added, or placed differently, or even that more axes are needed—the 
point is to think about classifying systems on the basis of their dynamics.

There are some striking patterns in Figure 1.3.1. All the simplest systems occur in the upper left-hand corner. These are 
the small linear systems that we learn about in the first few years of college. Roughly speaking, these linear systems 
exhibit growth, decay, or equilibrium when n  1, or oscillations when n  2. The italicized phrases in Figure 1.3.1 indicate 
that these broad classes of phenomena first arise in this part of the diagram. For example, an RC circuit has n  1 and 
cannot oscillate, whereas an RLC circuit has n  2 and can oscillate.

The next most familiar part of the picture is the upper right-hand corner. This is the domain of classical applied 
mathematics and mathematical physics where the linear partial differential equations live. Here we find Maxwell’s equations 
of electricity and magnetism, the heat equation, Schrödinger’s wave equation in quantum mechanics, and so on. These partial 
differential equations involve an infinite “continuum” of variables because each point in space contributes additional 
degrees of freedom. Even though these systems are large, they are tractable, thanks to such linear techniques as Fourier 
analysis and transform methods.

In contrast, the lower half of Figure 1.3.1—the nonlinear half—is often ignored or deferred to later courses. But no more! 
In this book we start in the lower left corner and systematically head to the right. As we increase the phase space 
dimension from n  1 to n  3, we encounter new phenomena at every step, from fixed points and bifurcations when n  1, to 
nonlinear oscillations when n  2, and finally chaos and fractals when n  3. In all cases, a geometric approach proves to be 
very powerful, and gives us most of the information we want, even though we usually can’t solve the equations in the 
traditional sense of finding a formula for the answer. Our journey will also take us to some of the most exciting parts of 
modern science, such as mathematical biology and condensed-matter physics.

You’ll notice that the framework also contains a region forbiddingly marked “The frontier.” It’s like in those old maps of 
the world, where the mapmakers wrote, “Here be dragons” on the unexplored parts of the globe. These topics are not 
completely unexplored, of course, but it is fair to say that they lie at the limits of current understanding. The problems 
are very hard, because they are both large and nonlinear. The resulting behavior is typically complicated in both space and 
time, as in the motion of a turbulent fluid or the patterns of electrical activity in a fibrillating heart. Toward the end 
of the book we will touch on some of these problems—they will certainly pose challenges for years to come.


